---
title: Co-design Toolkit Updates
date: "2021-10-12"
excerpt: Learnings about working remotely and engaging people with diverse needs.
---

The FLOE project is documenting and sharing new learnings about working remotely and engaging people with diverse
needs with the global community of Inclusive Design practitioners through the
[Community-Led Co-Design Kit](https://co-design.inclusivedesign.ca/).

The [BEING Futures](https://wiki.fluidproject.org/display/fluid/BEING+Futures+Project) project was a collaboration
between the Inclusive Design Research Centre (IDRC) and BEING Studio.
The goal of this project was to assist [BEING Studio](https://beingstudio.ca/) in brainstorming and conceptualizing
an emerging digital / in-person hybrid operating model. This work included needs-gathering through co-design with
artist members, with the aim of creatively mapping out design ideas for tools and activities for artists to access
resources and connect with other artists within and outside of BEING.

Working together with BEING Studio provided an opportunity for the FLOE project to further develop our community-led
co-design approaches. Collaborating with the BEING Studio facilitators to create and refine a co-design
plan provided new learnings about working with a community of artists with unique and diverse needs.

The FLOE project has also benefited from this collaboration through new learnings about remote co-design practices.
The challenges of working remotely have required significant re-thinking of how we connect and collaborate. During
the pandemic, BEING Studio pivoted quickly to working online. BEING artists and facilitators developed their own
ways of working together in this new context, and these ways of working were incorporated into the co-design
activities of the BEING Futures project.
