---
title: Introduction of Baby Bliss Bot Project
date: "2023-04-12"
excerpt: Advancing Communication for AAC Users through AI Tools

---

The Baby Bliss Bot project delves into the realm of using AI tools to enhance communication
for AAC users who rely on a minority language system. This article examines the background
of Blissymbolics, the potential of AI technology, and the objectives of the project.

[Blissymbolics](https://www.blissymbolics.org/), a language originally developed by Charles K.
Bliss for the purpose of international communication, has gained popularity as a method for
teaching communication to children with physical disabilities. Its origin can be traced back
to the pioneer program initiated by Shirley McNaughton at the Ontario Crippled Children's Centre
in 1971. Blissymbols offer a written semantic language without phonology that serves as a valuable
alternative for nonvocal individuals, such as those with cerebral palsy, who face obstacles in
acquiring phonological language skills.

The rapid advancement of AI technology, particularly Large Language Models (LLMs), presents a
tremendous opportunity to enhance societal engagement for nonvocal citizens. The Baby Bliss Bot (BBB)
project embarks on a community-led investigation to explore the possibilities and challenges of
leveraging AI to improve communication among Bliss users.

The BBB project sets forth several key goals:

* Investigating visual language systems and generative language models.
* Exploring the process of co-learning with machine learning models.
* Preserving the plasticity of formalized language or maintaining a living language while safeguarding
its essence.

The insights shared by AAC users underscore several crucial aspects:

* Enabling Blissymbolics to serve as a semantic shorthand, expanding meaning effectively for unfamiliar
listeners in a context-specific and adaptive manner.
* Personalizing vocabulary, presentation, and input to meet the unique needs of each AAC user.
* Assisting with the transition to literacy, particularly for second language learners.

The Baby Bliss Bot project anticipates yielding valuable insights and specifications for the development
of adaptive AI-based AAC systems. Alongside these findings, the project aims to create experimental
prototypes, pushing the boundaries of communication accessibility for AAC users.

By delving into the intersection of AI tools and communication enhancement for AAC users, the Baby Bliss
Bot project aspires to empower individuals utilizing Blissymbolics. Through collaborative exploration and
innovation, the project strives to foster inclusivity and break barriers, ultimately improving the lives
of nonvocal citizens within minority language systems.
